---
title: Bivariate density in TMB - calling Fortran through `tiny_ad`
layout: post
categories: []
author:
  display_name: Kinh Nguyen
  login: nguyenkinh
  email: nguyenkinh@ytecongcong.com
  url: https://www.google.com/profiles/112009149785989721279
author_login: Kinh Nguyen
author_email: nguyenkinh@ytecongcong.com
post_gravatar: 886f27ba4b392d00e87a35990840ba13
---
## [The gradient of the bivariate normal cumulative distribution ](https://blogs.sas.com/content/iml/2013/09/20/gradient-of-the-bivariate-normal-cumulative-distribution.html#:~:text=A formula for the gradient of the bivariate,φ (x)

A formula for the gradient of the bivariate normal CDF

Not everybody is interested in deriving formulas, so I'll jump straight to the result. Assume that the variables have been standardized and have correlation ρ, –1 < ρ < 1. Then the derivatives of the bivariate CDF are as follows:

> _∂F/∂x = φ(x) Φ(y; ρx, sqrt(1-ρ2))_  
> _∂F/∂y = φ(y) Φ(x; ρy, sqrt(1-ρ2))_

Here lowercase φ is the univariate standard normal density function and uppercase Φ is the univariate CDF. The expression says that the derivative with respect to _x_ of the bivariate cumulative distribution is equal to a product of two one-dimensional quantities: φ(_x_), the standard density (PDF) evaluated at _x_, and Φ(_y_; ρ_x_, sqrt(1-ρ2)), the CDF at _y_ of a normal distribution with mean ρ_x_ and standard deviation sqrt(1-ρ2).

```r
dF2dx = function(x, y, r) dnorm(x) * pnorm((y - r * x)/sqrt(1 - r^2)),
dF2dr = function(x, y, r) {
    1/(2 * pi * sqrt(1 - r^2)) * exp(-(x^2 - 2 * r * x * y + y^2)/(2 * (1 - r^2)))
}

```
### Deriving the formula for the gradient of the bivariate normal CDF

This blogging editor isn't great at formatting mathematics, but I'll indicate the main ideas for deriving the gradient of the bivariate normal cumulative distribution function. Recall that the cumulative distribution function is the double integral (with lower limit -∞) of the bivariate normal density:  
_F(x,y)_ = C ∫x ∫y _f(u,v) du dv_  
where  
_f(u, v)_ = exp( -(_u_2 - 2ρ_uv_ + _v_2) / (2 sqrt(1-ρ2)) ) and _C_ = 1/ (2 π sqrt(1-ρ2)) is a normalizing constant.

To compute _∂F/∂x_, use the fundamental theorem of calculus to obtain _∂F/∂x_ = C ∫y _f(x,v) dv_.

The numerator of the fractional expression inside the exp() function is _x_2 - 2ρ_xv_ + _v_2. If you complete the square in _v_, this expression equals (v-ρx)2 + x2(1-ρ)2). The term that does not involve _v_ can come outside the integral sign.

If you rewrite _C_ as (sqrt(2π))–1 \* (sqrt(2π) sqrt(1-ρ2))–1 and rearrange the terms, you obtain:

> _∂F/∂x = φ(x) Φ(y; ρx, sqrt(1-ρ2))_

This interesting expression shows once again how the multivariate normal distribution is convenient to work with. The expression says that the derivative with respect to _x_ of the bivariate cumulative distribution is equal to a product of two one-dimensional quantities: the standard univariate density (PDF) at _x_ and a univariate CDF at _y_. In the univariate CDF, the mean parameter is ρ_x_ and the standard deviation parameter is sqrt(1-ρ2).

The formula for the derivative _∂F/∂y_ is analogous.